README.md, before:

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.13883191.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13883191)

# `wristpy` <img src="https://media.githubusercontent.com/media/childmindresearch/wristpy/main/docs/wristpy_logo.png" align="right" width="25%"/>

 A Python package for wrist-worn accelerometer data processing.



[![Build](https://github.com/childmindresearch/wristpy/actions/workflows/test.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/childmindresearch/wristpy/actions/workflows/test.yaml?query=branch%3Amain)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/childmindresearch/wristpy/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=22HWWFWPW5)](https://codecov.io/gh/childmindresearch/wristpy)
[![Ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
![stability-experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/stability-experimental-orange.svg)
[![LGPL--2.1 License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-LGPL--2.1-blue.svg)](https://github.com/childmindresearch/wristpy/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![pages](https://img.shields.io/badge/api-docs-blue)](https://childmindresearch.github.io/wristpy)

Welcome to wristpy, a Python library designed for processing and analyzing wrist-worn accelerometer data. This library provides a set of tools for loading sensor information, calibrating raw accelerometer data, calculating physical activity metrics (ENMO derived) and sleep metrics (angle-Z derived), finding non-wear periods, and detecting sleep periods (onset and wakeup times). Additionally, we provide access to other sensor data that may be recorded by the watch, including; temperature, luminosity, capacitive sensing, battery voltage, and all metadata.

## Supported formats & devices

The package currently supports the following formats:

| Format | Manufacturer | Device | Implementation status |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| GT3X | Actigraph | wGT3X-BT | ✅ |
| BIN | GENEActiv | GENEActiv | ✅ |

**Special Note**
    The `idle_sleep_mode` for Actigraph watches will lead to uneven sampling rates during periods of no motion (read about this [here](https://actigraphcorp.my.site.com/support/s/article/Idle-Sleep-Mode-Explained)). Consequently, this causes issues when implementing wristpy's non-wear and sleep detection. As of this moment, the authors of this package do not take any steps to impute data during these time gaps and would caution to not use data collected with this mode enabled. Of course, users can make use of the readers within wristpy for their own analysis with this type of data.

## Processing pipeline implementation

The main processing pipeline of the wristpy module can be described as follows:

- Data loading: sensor data is loaded using [`actfast`](https://github.com/childmindresearch/actfast), and a `WatchData` object is created to store all sensor data
- Data calibration: A post-manufacturer calibration step can be applied, to ensure that the acceleration sensor is measuring 1*g* force during periods of no motion. There are three possible options: `None`, `gradient`, `ggir`.
- Metrics Calculation: Calculates various metrics on the calibrated data, namely ENMO (euclidean norm , minus one) and angle-Z (angle of acceleration relative to the *x-y* axis).
- Non-wear detection: We find periods of non-wear based on the acceleration data. Specifically, the standard deviation of the acceleration values in a given time window, along each axis, is used as a threshold to decide `wear` or `not wear`.
- Sleep Detection: Using the HDCZ<sup>1</sup> and HSPT<sup>2</sup> algorithms to analyze changes in arm angle we are able to find periods of sleep. We find the sleep onset-wakeup times for all sleep windows detected.
- Physical activity levels: Using the enmo data (aggreagated into epoch 1 time bins, 5 second default) we compute activity levels into the following categories: inactivity, light activity, moderate activity, vigorous activity. The default threshold values have been chosen based on the values presented in the Hildenbrand 2014 study<sup>3</sup>.


## Installation

Install this package from PyPI via :

```sh
pip install wristpy
```

## Quick start

### Using Wristpy through the command-line:
#### Run single files:
```sh
wristpy /input/file/path.gt3x -o /save/path/file_name.csv -c gradient
```

#### Run entire directories:
```sh
wristpy /path/to/files/input_dir -o /path/to/files/output_dir -c gradient -O .csv
```

### Using Wristpy through a python script or notebook:

#### Running single files:
```Python

from wristpy.core import orchestrator

# Define input file path and output location
# Support for saving as .csv and .parquet
input_path = '/path/to/your/file.gt3x'
output_path = '/path/to/save/file_name.csv'

# Run the orchestrator
results = orchestrator.run(
    input=input_path,
    output=output_path,
    calibrator='gradient',  # Choose between 'ggir', 'gradient', or 'none'
)

#Data available in results object
enmo = results.enmo
anglez = results.anglez
physical_activity_levels = results.physical_activity_levels
nonwear_array = results.nonwear_epoch
sleep_windows = results.sleep_windows_epoch
```
#### Running entire directories:
```Python

from wristpy.core import orchestrator

# Define input file path and output location

input_path = '/path/to/files/input_dir'
output_path = '/path/to/files/output_dir'

# Run the orchestrator
# Specify the output file type, support for saving as .csv and .parquet
results_dict = orchestrator.run(
    input=input_path,
    output=output_path,
    calibrator='gradient',  # Choose between 'ggir', 'gradient', or 'none'
    output_filetype = '.csv'
)


#Data available in dictionry of results.
subject1 = results_dict['subject1']

enmo = subject1.enmo
anglez = subject1.anglez
physical_activity_levels = subject1.physical_activity_levels
nonwear_array = subject1.nonwear_epoch
sleep_windows = subject1.sleep_windows_epoch
```

## References
1. van Hees, V.T., Sabia, S., Jones, S.E. et al. Estimating sleep parameters
              using an accelerometer without sleep diary. Sci Rep 8, 12975 (2018).
              https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-31266-z
2. van Hees, V. T., et al. A Novel, Open Access Method to Assess Sleep
            Duration Using a Wrist-Worn Accelerometer. PLoS One 10, e0142533 (2015).
            https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0142533
3. Hildebrand, M., et al. Age group comparability of raw accelerometer output
            from wrist- and hip-worn monitors. Medicine and Science in
            Sports and Exercise, 46(9), 1816-1824 (2014).
            https://doi.org/10.1249/mss.0000000000000289

Commit message:

Feat/issue 102/handle idle sleep mode (#143)
* Initial support for reading idle_sleep_mode

Get idle_sleep_mode flag from metadata
Only available for .gt3x files.
Add it to watch_Data class to access later

* Create idle_sleep_mode_imputation.py

Initial version of the idle_sleep_mode data imputation, resamples for unevenly spaced  samples

* Create test_idle_sleep_mode.py

Initial unit tests to check effective sampling rate is correct

* Update test_idle_sleep_mode.py

Adding more unit tests

* Update test_idle_sleep_mode.py

Check filled value is assigned
Spacing for AAA testing

* Update idle_sleep_mode_imputation.py

Fix mypy error with this ugly monstrosity

* Update test_idle_sleep_mode.py

Fix to ensure numerical result from time.diff().mean()

* Update orchestrator.py

Adding check for idle_sleep_mode into run_file()
Might be hard to hit this line for testing

* Update orchestrator.py

Fix ruff format error

* New sample data

Added new sample data for idle_sleep_mode = true smoke test

* Addressing PR comments

Moving idle_sleep_mode imputation to after the calibration step
Imputing acceleration to exactly (0,0,-1)

* Update test_orchestrator.py

Path error for the full_dir processing

* Update README.md

Added info about handling idle_sleep_mode

* Update readers.py

Added info to docstring about idle_sleep_mode_flag settings

* Update idle_sleep_mode_imputation.py

Fix docstring for new fill value

* Update pyproject.toml

Update version number

* Update README.md

Fix zenodo badge for DOI that resolves to latest version

README.md, after:

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.13883190.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13883190)

# `wristpy` <img src="https://media.githubusercontent.com/media/childmindresearch/wristpy/main/docs/wristpy_logo.png" align="right" width="25%"/>

 A Python package for wrist-worn accelerometer data processing.



[![Build](https://github.com/childmindresearch/wristpy/actions/workflows/test.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/childmindresearch/wristpy/actions/workflows/test.yaml?query=branch%3Amain)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/childmindresearch/wristpy/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=22HWWFWPW5)](https://codecov.io/gh/childmindresearch/wristpy)
[![Ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
![stability-experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/stability-experimental-orange.svg)
[![LGPL--2.1 License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-LGPL--2.1-blue.svg)](https://github.com/childmindresearch/wristpy/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![pages](https://img.shields.io/badge/api-docs-blue)](https://childmindresearch.github.io/wristpy)

Welcome to wristpy, a Python library designed for processing and analyzing wrist-worn accelerometer data. This library provides a set of tools for loading sensor information, calibrating raw accelerometer data, calculating physical activity metrics (ENMO derived) and sleep metrics (angle-Z derived), finding non-wear periods, and detecting sleep periods (onset and wakeup times). Additionally, we provide access to other sensor data that may be recorded by the watch, including; temperature, luminosity, capacitive sensing, battery voltage, and all metadata.

## Supported formats & devices

The package currently supports the following formats:

| Format | Manufacturer | Device | Implementation status |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| GT3X | Actigraph | wGT3X-BT | ✅ |
| BIN | GENEActiv | GENEActiv | ✅ |

**Special Note**
    The `idle_sleep_mode` for Actigraph watches will lead to uneven sampling rates during periods of no motion (read about this [here](https://actigraphcorp.my.site.com/support/s/article/Idle-Sleep-Mode-Explained)). Consequently, this causes issues when implementing wristpy's non-wear and sleep detection. As of this moment, we fill in the missing acceleration data with the assumption that the watch is perfeclty idle in the face-up position (Acceleration vector = [0, 0, -1]). The data is filled in at the same sampling rate as the raw acceleration data. In the special circumstance when acceleration samples are not evenly spaced, the data is resampled to the highest effective sampling rate to ensure linearly sampled data.

## Processing pipeline implementation

The main processing pipeline of the wristpy module can be described as follows:

- **Data loading**: sensor data is loaded using [`actfast`](https://github.com/childmindresearch/actfast), and a `WatchData` object is created to store all sensor data
- **Data calibration**: A post-manufacturer calibration step can be applied, to ensure that the acceleration sensor is measuring 1*g* force during periods of no motion. There are three possible options: `None`, `gradient`, `ggir`.
- ***Data imputation*** In the special case when dealing with the Actigraph `idle_sleep_mode == enabled`, the gaps in acceleration are filled in after calibration, to avoid biasing the calibration phase.
- **Metrics Calculation**: Calculates various metrics on the calibrated data, namely ENMO (euclidean norm , minus one) and angle-Z (angle of acceleration relative to the *x-y* axis).
- **Non-wear detection**: We find periods of non-wear based on the acceleration data. Specifically, the standard deviation of the acceleration values in a given time window, along each axis, is used as a threshold to decide `wear` or `not wear`.
- **Sleep Detection**: Using the HDCZ<sup>1</sup> and HSPT<sup>2</sup> algorithms to analyze changes in arm angle we are able to find periods of sleep. We find the sleep onset-wakeup times for all sleep windows detected.
- **Physical activity levels**: Using the enmo data (aggreagated into epoch 1 time bins, 5 second default) we compute activity levels into the following categories: inactivity, light activity, moderate activity, vigorous activity. The default threshold values have been chosen based on the values presented in the Hildenbrand 2014 study<sup>3</sup>.


## Installation

Install this package from PyPI via :

```sh
pip install wristpy
```

## Quick start

### Using Wristpy through the command-line:
#### Run single files:
```sh
wristpy /input/file/path.gt3x -o /save/path/file_name.csv -c gradient
```

#### Run entire directories:
```sh
wristpy /path/to/files/input_dir -o /path/to/files/output_dir -c gradient -O .csv
```

### Using Wristpy through a python script or notebook:

#### Running single files:
```Python

from wristpy.core import orchestrator

# Define input file path and output location
# Support for saving as .csv and .parquet
input_path = '/path/to/your/file.gt3x'
output_path = '/path/to/save/file_name.csv'

# Run the orchestrator
results = orchestrator.run(
    input=input_path,
    output=output_path,
    calibrator='gradient',  # Choose between 'ggir', 'gradient', or 'none'
)

#Data available in results object
enmo = results.enmo
anglez = results.anglez
physical_activity_levels = results.physical_activity_levels
nonwear_array = results.nonwear_epoch
sleep_windows = results.sleep_windows_epoch
```
#### Running entire directories:
```Python

from wristpy.core import orchestrator

# Define input file path and output location

input_path = '/path/to/files/input_dir'
output_path = '/path/to/files/output_dir'

# Run the orchestrator
# Specify the output file type, support for saving as .csv and .parquet
results_dict = orchestrator.run(
    input=input_path,
    output=output_path,
    calibrator='gradient',  # Choose between 'ggir', 'gradient', or 'none'
    output_filetype = '.csv'
)


#Data available in dictionry of results.
subject1 = results_dict['subject1']

enmo = subject1.enmo
anglez = subject1.anglez
physical_activity_levels = subject1.physical_activity_levels
nonwear_array = subject1.nonwear_epoch
sleep_windows = subject1.sleep_windows_epoch
```

## References
1. van Hees, V.T., Sabia, S., Jones, S.E. et al. Estimating sleep parameters
              using an accelerometer without sleep diary. Sci Rep 8, 12975 (2018).
              https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-31266-z
2. van Hees, V. T., et al. A Novel, Open Access Method to Assess Sleep
            Duration Using a Wrist-Worn Accelerometer. PLoS One 10, e0142533 (2015).
            https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0142533
3. Hildebrand, M., et al. Age group comparability of raw accelerometer output
            from wrist- and hip-worn monitors. Medicine and Science in
            Sports and Exercise, 46(9), 1816-1824 (2014).
            https://doi.org/10.1249/mss.0000000000000289
